pwd  : Command pwd prints the current working directory in an absolute path format.
cd : Command cd changes the current working directory to the given directory as an argument. If no argument is given, cd changes the current working directory to the logged-in user’s home directory.
mkdir : This command creates a directory.
cp : This command copies directories or files from one directory to the other.
rm : This command deletes a file or a directory


Set up your git enviroment

I assume you use a Linux, Mac, Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) environment. Execute the command

git --version 

to check whether git is installed. To add your credentials to git, use the following

git config --global user.name "Name"
git config --global user.email "Email"

You may also wish add the following settings to avoid issues with line endings. Interested readers can look at this Stack Overflow post or this blog

git config --global core.autocrlf input
git config --global core.safecrlf true

Set up your SSH key pair

We can check whether our computer already has an SSH key generated by listing files in the hiddend folder .ssh.

ls -la ~/.ssh | grep 'id_rsa'

It will list two entries id_rsa and id_rsa.pub if they exists. Otherwise, create the key pair via running

ssh-keygen -t RSA

from the home folder.
Add your SSH public key to your GitHub user settings

Copy the contents of the public key file (i.e. id_rsa.pub) to

-> GitHub Settings

-> SSH and GPG Keys

-> New SSH Key

Github now has a record of your computer.
Cloning your GitHub repository

First, create a GitHub repository named cs102-git-essentials. Then, from the command line execute

git clone git@github.com:<your GitHub username>/cs102-git-essentials.git

from the folder where you want to keep your local reposiory. It will create folder cs102-git-essentials with a hiddle directory named .git.

We can check whether the remote origin is already be setup by running

git remote -v

Staging the changes (adding files and folders) in a repository

Once you have the repository, you can create folders and files in the local repostory folder and then you can stage (add) to the repository.

git add file_name.extension 

To add all files in the current directory

git add .

To see the current status of the repository, run the following

git status

Commit the local changes and push

We now commit changes. That means the current state of the files/folders will be stored in the git repository permanently.

git commit -m "type a message to name the changes"

Once the changes are committed it can be pushed to the server repository

git push origin main

Pull the new changes at the server

Suppose your remote repository (at Github) is ahead of your local repository due to a recent change happened at the server. We then need to pull the changes down to avoid conflicts by the following command

git pull origin main 

Note that main is your current branch.
Misc

To know the current branch, use the following command

git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD

or

git branch --show-current

Command git branch will show all all the local branches of the repository. The current brach will be starred.

For a better visualization of your repository with all commits and details, use the following command

git log --oneline --decorate --graph --all
bin/bash: wq: command not found
